Light Freshness Edit: ASP.NET - Performance (#37106)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/performance/memory.md

description: Learn how memory is managed in ASP.NET Core and how the garbage collector (GC) works.
ms.author: tdykstra
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 05/06/2026
uid: performance/memory

> # customer intent: As an ASP.NET developer, I want to memory management and garbage collection in ASP.NET Core, so I manage memory in my apps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# customer intent: As an ASP.NET developer, I want to understand memory management and garbage collection in ASP.NET Core, so I can manage memory in my apps.
```

> # customer intent: As an ASP.NET developer, I want to memory management and garbage collection in ASP.NET Core, so I manage memory in my apps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# customer intent: As an ASP.NET developer, I want to understand memory management and garbage collection in ASP.NET Core, so I can manage memory in my apps.
```
"I want to memory management" missing verb.

---
# Memory management and garbage collection (GC) in ASP.NET Core
# Memory management and garbage collection in ASP.NET Core

By [Sébastien Ros](https://github.com/sebastienros) and [Rick Anderson](https://twitter.com/RickAndMSFT)

Memory management is complex, even in a managed framework like .NET. Analyzing and understanding memory issues can be challenging. This article:
Memory management is complex, even in a managed framework like .NET. Analyzing and resolving memory issues can be challenging. Memory leaks and garbage collection (GC) issues are commonly due to a lack of understanding about how memory consumption works in .NET, or not understanding the process for measuring usage.

* Was motivated by many *memory leak* and *GC not working* issues. Most of these issues were caused by not understanding how memory consumption works in .NET, or not understanding how it's measured.
* Demonstrates problematic memory use, and suggests alternative approaches.
This article demonstrates common memory use patterns that can be problematic, and suggests alternate approaches.

> ## How garbage collection (GC) works in .NET

Reviewer: ###

> ## Explore garbage collection in .NET

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Explore garbage collection (GC) in .NET
```

> The GC process allocates heap segments where each segment is a contiguous range of memory. Objects placed in the heap are categorized into one of three generations (Gen): 0, 1, or 2. The generation determines the frequency the GC attempts to release memory on managed objects which the app no longer references. More frequent collections address the lower numbered generations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The GC process allocates heap segments where each segment is a contiguous range of memory. Objects placed in the heap are categorized into one of three generations: 0, 1, or 2. The generation determines the frequency of the GC attempts to release memory on managed objects that the app no longer references.  The GC addresses the lower-numbered generations more frequently.
```

> Objects are moved from one generation to another based on their lifetime. As objects live longer, they're moved into a higher generation. As mentioned previously, GC runs less often on higher generations. Short-term lived objects always remain in Gen 0. For example, objects that are referenced during the life of a web request are short lived. Application level [singletons](xref:fundamentals/dependency-injection#service-lifetimes) generally migrate to Gen 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Objects are moved from one generation to another based on their lifetime. As objects live longer, they're moved into a higher generation. As mentioned previously, GC runs less often on higher generations. Short-lived objects always remain in Gen 0. For example, objects that are referenced during the life of a web request are short lived. Application level [singletons](xref:fundamentals/dependency-injection#service-lifetimes) generally migrate to Gen 2.
```

`GC.Collect` is useful when investigating memory leaks. Calling `GC.Collect()` triggers a blocking garbage collection cycle that tries to reclaim all objects inaccessible from managed code. It's a useful way to understand the size of the reachable live objects in the heap, and track growth of memory size over time.

## Analyze the memory usage of an app

Dedicated tools can help analyze memory usage, including:

* Counting object references.
* Measuring how much effect the GC has on CPU usage.
* Measuring memory space used for each generation.

Use the following tools to analyze memory usage:

* [dotnet-trace utility](/dotnet/core/diagnostics/dotnet-trace) (can use on production machines)
* [Analyze memory usage without the Visual Studio debugger](/visualstudio/profiling/memory-usage-without-debugging2)
* [Measure memory usage in Visual Studio](/visualstudio/profiling/memory-usage)

### Detect memory issues

Task Manager can be used to get an idea of how much memory an ASP.NET app is using. The Task Manager memory value:

> * Represents the amount of memory  used by the ASP.NET process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Represents the amount of memory used by the ASP.NET process.
```
Very minor: Removed extra space.

* Includes the app's living objects and other memory consumers such as native memory usage.

If the Task Manager memory value increases indefinitely and never flattens out, the app has a memory leak. The following sections demonstrate and explain several memory usage patterns.

## Explore the sample display memory usage app

The [MemoryLeak sample app](https://github.com/sebastienros/memoryleak) is available on GitHub. The MemoryLeak app:

* Includes a diagnostic controller that gathers real-time memory and GC data for the app.
* Has an Index page that displays the memory and GC data. The Index page is refreshed every second.
* Contains an API controller that provides various memory load patterns.
* Can be used to display memory usage patterns of ASP.NET Core apps, but it isn't a supported tool.

> Run MemoryLeak. Allocated memory slowly increases until a GC occurs. Memory increases because the tool allocates custom object to capture data. The following image illustrates the MemoryLeak Index page when a Gen 0 GC occurs. The chart shows 0 RPS (Requests per second) because no API endpoints from the API controller are called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run MemoryLeak. Allocated memory slowly increases until a GC occurs. Memory increases because the tool allocates a custom object to capture data. The following image shows the MemoryLeak Index page when a Gen 0 GC occurs. The chart shows 0 RPS (Requests per second) because no API endpoints from the API controller have been called.
```

}
```

The following chart is generated with a relatively small load that shows how GC affects memory allocations.

:::image source="memory/_static/bigstring.png" alt-text="Chart showing memory allocations for a relatively small load.":::

The chart illustrates the following details:

* 4K RPS (Requests per second)
* Gen 0 GC collections occur about every 2 seconds
* Constant Working Set, approximately 500 MB
* CPU is 12%
* Stable memory consumption and release (through GC)

The following chart is taken at the max throughput that the machine can handle.

:::image source="memory/_static/bigstring2.png" alt-text="Chart showing max throughput.":::

The chart illustrates the following details:

* 22 K RPS
* Gen 0 GC collections occur several times per second

> * Gen 1 collections trigger because the app allocates more memory per second

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Gen 1 collections trigger because the app allocates significantly more memory per second
```
"significantly" is technically meaningful in this case.

Changing `ServerGarbageCollection` in the project file requires the app to be rebuilt.

> [!NOTE]
> Server garbage collection is **not** available on machines with a single core. For more information, see the <xref:System.Runtime.GCSettings.IsServerGC> property.

The following image shows the memory profile under a 5K RPS using the Workstation GC.

:::image source="memory/_static/workstation.png" alt-text="Chart showing memory profile for a Workstation GC.":::

The differences between this chart and the server version are significant:

* Working Set drops from 500 MB to 70 MB
* GC does Gen 0 collections multiple times per second instead of every 2 seconds
* GC drops from 300 MB to 10 MB

On a typical web server environment, CPU usage is more important than memory, therefore the Server GC is better. If memory utilization is high and CPU usage is relatively low, the Workstation GC might be more performant. For example, high density hosting several web apps where memory is scarce.

> 

Reviewer 2: When an achor is removed, good to see what was using it.  I checked and there were 7 articles using this "sc" anchor in this repo.  I will create a seperate issue for that and take care of it.

Author: I always check for anchor usage before removing, and update as needed. My results showed zero hits this time. Not sure why there was a discrepancy between your search and mine.

Author: <img width="1125" height="262" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/91c5d540-d915-4558-adc8-aee27a23e95c" />

Reviewer 2: Thanks, that is great you check.  Sorry, I realize now my comment implied it wasn't checked. I could have worded that in a better way.
The query I used was this:
https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Adotnet%2FAspNetCore.Docs%20performance%2Fmemory%23sc&type=code

Addressing those in #37116

Author: Thank you. I see now what I missed. I'm not used to <xref> links that leave off the file extension. In most other repos, the build validation detects broken bookmark links. Thanks for dbl-checking.

### GC using Docker and small containers

When multiple containerized apps run on the same machine, Workstation GC might be more performant than Server GC. For more information, see [Running with Server GC in a Small Container (blog)](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/running-with-server-gc-in-a-small-container-scenario-part-0/) and [Running with Server GC in a Small Container Scenario Part 1 – Hard Limit for the GC Heap (blog)](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/running-with-server-gc-in-a-small-container-scenario-part-1-hard-limit-for-the-gc-heap/).

### Persistent object references

> The GC can't free objects that are referenced. Objects that are referenced but no longer needed result in a memory leak. If the app frequently allocates objects and fails to free them after they aren't needed, memory usage increases over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The GC can't free objects that are referenced. Objects that are referenced but no longer needed result in a memory leak. If the app frequently allocates objects and fails to free them after they are no longer needed, memory usage increases over time.
```

}
```

> <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileProviders.PhysicalFileProvider> is a managed class, so any instance are collected at the end of the request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileProviders.PhysicalFileProvider> is a managed class, so any instance is collected at the end of the request.
```
Minor item: "Any instance" is singular.

The following image shows the memory profile while invoking the `fileprovider` API continuously.

:::image source="memory/_static/fileprovider.png" alt-text="Chart showing a native memory leak":::

> The preceding chart shows an obvious issue with the implementation of this class, as it keeps increasing memory usage. This result is a known problem racked in [GitHub dotnet/aspnetcore issue #844](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/issues/844).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The preceding chart shows an obvious issue with the implementation of this class, as it keeps increasing memory usage. This result is a known problem tracked in [GitHub dotnet/aspnetcore issue #844](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/issues/844).
```
Typo, missing "t" in "tracked".  Note to self: 3110 was changed to 844 since 3110 auto redirects to 844 now.

The same leak occurs in user code in the following scenarios:

* Not releasing the class correctly
* Forgetting to invoke the `Dispose` method of the dependent objects that should be disposed

### Large object heap

Frequent memory allocation/free cycles result in fragmented memory, especially when allocating large chunks of memory. Objects are allocated in contiguous blocks of memory. To mitigate fragmentation, when the GC frees memory, it tries to defragment it. This process is called **compaction**. Compaction involves moving objects. Moving large objects imposes a performance penalty. For this reason, the GC creates a special memory zone for *large* objects, called the [large object heap](/dotnet/standard/garbage-collection/large-object-heap) (LOH). Objects that are greater than 85,000 bytes (approximately 83 KB) are:

* Placed on the LOH
* Not compacted
* Processed during Gen 2 collection

> When the LOH is full, the GC triggers a GC 2 collection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the LOH is full, the GC triggers a Gen 2 collection.
```
Generation 2 collection not Garbage Collection 2 collection

:::image source="memory/_static/loh2.png" alt-text="Chart showing memory profile of allocating one more byte":::

> [!NOTE]
> The `byte[]` structure has overhead bytes, which is why 84,976 bytes triggers the 85,000 limit.

Comparing the two preceding charts:

* Working Set is similar for both scenarios, about 450 MB
* Under LOH requests (84,975 bytes) show mostly Gen 0 collections

> * Over LOH requests generate constant Gen 2 collections, which are expensive, more CPU is required, throughput drops ~50%

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Over LOH requests generate constant Gen 2 collections, which are expensive. More CPU is required and throughput drops ~50%.
```
Very minor: The comma splice in the original seemed awkward.  Split into two sentances.
